      Inquiry
      An Interdisciplinary Journal of Philosophy




      ISSN: (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/sinq20




Commentary on Mark Richard, Meanings as Species

Daniel Dennett

To cite this article: Daniel Dennett (2024) Commentary on Mark Richard, Meanings as Species,
Inquiry, 67:2, 626-632, DOI: 10.1080/0020174X.2022.2039852
To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/0020174X.2022.2039852




       Published online: 24 Mar 2022.



       Submit your article to this journal



       Article views: 175



       View related articles



       View Crossmark data




                      Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
             https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=sinq20
INQUIRY
2024, VOL. 67, NO. 2, 626–632
https://doi.org/10.1080/0020174X.2022.2039852


COMMENTARY

Commentary on Mark Richard, Meanings as Species
Daniel Dennett
Center for Cognitive Studies, Tufts University, Medford, MA, USA
ARTICLE HISTORY Received 17 January 2020; Accepted 17 January 2020




A fond farewell to Cartesian linguistics
It’s been a long productive ride, but it’s time to get oﬀ the bandwagon
and recognize that the Cartesian tradition, in analytic philosophy of
language and mind and linguistics, has played itself out in a constructive
and honorable way: by being both rigorous and ambitious, it has uncov-
ered the contradictions in its own grand scheme, and helped lay the foun-
dations for a more naturalistic understanding of meaning. It is hard to
imagine how Einsteinian physics could have ever come into existence
without being able to use Newtonian physics as a well-equipped base
camp, and the emerging view of meanings that Richard so patiently
and exhaustively extracts from the analytic tradition is similarly illumi-
nated by its obsolescent concepts. Essentialism is always appealing to
theoreticians, especially to philosophers, because it promises what
might be called the Euclidiﬁcation of theory: a set of deﬁnitions and
axioms from which theorems might be deduced and then triumphantly
conﬁrmed empirically, just like geometry, the ideal of knowledge ever
since Socrates and the slave boy. Wouldn’t it be wonderful to have a
theory of meaning that was full of rigorous proofs, thanks to a starter
kit of ingenious idealizations!
    That dream has been the inspiration of philosophers who have clung
to Frege and Russell and their brilliant successors for more than a
century, and one of the most interesting features of Richard’s book – to
me – is how hard he has to labor to get and hold the attention of
those of his colleagues whose natural reaction to his arguments for
these innovations is so often an inability to suspend disbelief long
enough to consider a position. Another is his exposure of what I now

CONTACT Daniel Dennett        daniel.dennett@tufts.edu         Center for Cognitive Studies, Tufts Uni-
versity, Medford, MA 02155, USA
© 2022 Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group
                                                                         INQUIRY            627


recognize as a philosophical syndrome: the inability of many philosophers
to live with some of the counterintuitive doctrines of some of their heroes.
Long ago I realized that many self-styled Wittgensteinians couldn’t recon-
cile themselves to the ominously ‘behavioristic’ implications of his beetle
in the box (which I have always endorsed – see my discussion in Con-
sciousness Explained (1991a), pp. 462–463), and Richard shows that a
similar discomfort haunts those who admire Quine for his ambitious
attempt, mainly in Word and Object’ (Quine 1951), but also, of course, in
‘Two Dogmas of Empiricism’ (Quine 1960), to ‘regiment’ language, the
ultimate goal of so much Cartesian theorizing. Indeterminacy of
meaning? Fie! How can we accept any indeterminacy of meaning if we
are to Euclidify the ﬁeld? Quine has to be wrong about that! Richard
shows that we can do this as calmly as rigorous Darwinian biologists
accept the indeterminacy of species boundaries. The empirical world
has, happily, enough regularity, enough ‘real patterns’ (Dennett, 1991b)
in it, to anchor our meanings well enough to give us time to build
science using our shared understanding. As Richard says,
  I think Quine’s skepticism is overdone. I agree that there is a healthy indetermi-
  nacy as to whether, for example, samples of green tea are things of which
  ‘water’ as it’s used in the everyday is true. But I reject Quine’s linguistic behavior-
  ism. Psychological structures like prototypes and schemata as well as (innate)
  psychological states involved in the analysis of perception and the generation
  of ‘core concepts’ are shared by all normal humans. They are associated in the
  course of language learning with both lexical items and more complex phrases.
  This association helps ground translation, I would say, in a way that supports
  our everyday practices of interpretation without oﬀering support to the idea
  that ‘Pupkins’ means something like, ‘Oh, lo, an animated piece of the sum of
  the canine world’. This and what I called in this section causal constraints on
  translation, I would say, reduces but does not eliminate referential indetermi-
  nacy. (p. 115)

Quine was onto this, in many regards, but he never got around to seeing
how Darwinian thinking could make his case much more intuitive.
Richard, in his Coda, sums it up:
  Thinking of meaning in this way has a number of payoﬀs. It reconciles Quine’s
  skepticism about an epistemically interesting sort of analyticity—one that could
  ground a priori knowledge—with the belief that everyday talk about meaning is
  tracking something real, something about which we can and should theorize.
  (p. 201)

Here I must point to a major lacuna in Richard’s impressive command of
the literature: Ruth Millikan is never mentioned. Her 1984 book, Language,
628          D. DENNETT


Thought and other Biological Categories, took a long time to sink in, and is
still considered, as Meanings as Species manifests, to be outside the canon
of unignorable work by the coterie of thinkers Richard is mainly addres-
sing. But consider how her assault on what she called ‘meaning rational-
ism’ in 1984 presages Richard’s claims:
      We must be willing to discover that, just as we cannot know apriori or with Car-
      tesian certainty whether any particular thing we think or say is true, so we cannot
      know a priori or with Cartesian certainty that in seeming to think or talk about
      something we are thinking or talking about—anything at all. We cannot know
      a priori that we mean. Nor can we know a priori or with Cartesian certainty
      what it is that we are thinking or talking about. Further, we cannot tell just by
      armchair reﬂection whether or not two terms in our idiolect are synonymous,
      whether a single term is ambiguous, or whether any particular state of aﬀairs
      is or is not ‘logically possible’ in any interesting or useful sense of that term. (p. 10)

And she issued a diagnosis that must have fallen on deaf ears, given the
eﬀorts Richard must go through to close oﬀ the escape routes:

      Meaning rationalism is not a single doctrine but a syndrome. The paradigm
      meaning rationalist believes that intensions can’t be wrong or mistaken and
      that mere (seeming) thoughts-of, as opposed to judgments about, cannot be
      senseless. … Compulsive search for “necessary and suﬃcient conditions” by
      which to deﬁne certain puzzling terms and engaging in the pastime of invent-
      ing ﬁctitious “counterexamples” to these deﬁnitions is one of the clearest symp-
      toms of meaning rationalism. (pp. 326–327)

One of the innovations Richard explores so imaginatively in his book is
the idea of Interpretive Common Ground (ICG), which includes the exter-
nal and social environment in which a speaker is situated. Millikan, in her
most recent book, Beyond Concepts (2017), oﬀers a way of dealing with
the details of these social and psychological processes that cuts
through most of the problems in a single stroke: drop the requirement
that there are concepts that are (and must be) shared for communication
to be possible (see Richard, p. 77). Millikan’s neologism, unicepts, are like
concepts in that they anchor the meaning of words for individual speakers,
but each speaker has her own way of coming to her current set of uni-
cepts, and it is inﬂuenced by features of her life that she may be largely
oblivious to. Unicepts are the (ultimately neurological) structures based
on unitrackers that enable us to track regularities in the world, the Gibso-
nian aﬀordances in our worlds that are worth attending to, and they are
idiosyncratic, relying on the ‘clumpiness’ of the world to provide suﬃcient
landmarks so that people can get on the same page most of the time
without diﬃculty.
                                                                                     INQUIRY          629


    I am amused to note that here is another instance of what might be
called the magical use of the deﬁnite article by philosophers. David
Chalmers (1995) gave us The Hard Problem, which has tied conscious-
ness researchers in knots for a quarter century because they think
they must have a single, shared property that is, well, essential for con-
sciousness. I have argued that they are bamboozled by the word ‘the’
just as magicians were fooled by Ralph Hull’s magic trick, The Tuned
Deck, which was just a bag of familiar tricks his fellow magicians
already all knew, not a Hard Problem (Dennett, 2005, 2013). When phi-
losophers speak, as they have since Frege, of The concept of DOG or
HORSE, they are falling in a similar imagination trap.1 We can each
have our own concept (or better, unicept) of DOG and HORSE, and as
long as our concepts, like our idiolects, stay in robust consonance
with those of our neighbors and associates, we will manage just ﬁne.
We don’t need to go through the hundreds or thousands of ‘connota-
tions’ each of us has for ‘married’ or ‘Jew’ sorting them into the (‘essen-
tial’) components of meaning and the historical accidents of association
and disposition. When evolutionary biologists adopt ‘population think-
ing’ they don’t have to worry much about the proper distinction
between varieties and subspecies, which individual organisms are
‘wild type’, and which organisms are ‘sports’ or ‘mutants’. The sorta
operator (Dennett, 2013, 2017) can be used responsibly in spite of phi-
losophers’ obsessions with ‘diﬀerence-makers’ and other substitutes of
essences.
    One of Richard’s insights is an enlargement of Quine’s point about the
triviality of stipulative deﬁnitions, which create, at best, transient analyti-
cities. We philosophers are so fond to stipulative deﬁnitions in formal
systems that we tend to think of them as an ideal, roughly approximated
(somehow) in natural language, and perhaps even a worthy philosophical
endeavor. Think how often a philosophical ‘theory’ of this or that turns
out to be, on examination, ‘a system of deﬁnitions propounded and
defended’ (the subtitle of David Schwayder’s 1965 book). But when we sti-
pulatively deﬁne a term, we launch it into the world as a candidate for
adoption, and this is a ballistic launch, nothing we can easily control or
guide as time passes (Richard, pp. 36–37). Just think of how Dawkins’
rather careful deﬁnition of his coinage ‘meme’ has evolved over the
years (Dennett, 2017).

1
    ‘If we take the deﬁnite article seriously—the concept marriage has diﬀerent application conditions now
      than it did before—we seem to be rejecting referentialism’ (Richard, p. 129).
630          D. DENNETT


   Richard has delved well into the ways and ideas of evolutionary
biology, but he’s missed a few tricks that could help his case. A footnote
(p. 12) perpetuates a common confusion about Lamarckianism.

      There are of course major disanalogies between biological and linguistic evol-
      ution. For example: Linguistic evolution is in good part Lamarckian, with
      ‘acquired traits’ often becoming ﬁxed in a language. Even granting that there
      are some Lamarckian processes in biological evolution, they are presumably
      nowhere near as important biologically as they are linguistically.

The Lamarckian heresy is properly restricted to multicellular organisms
that distinguish somatic cells from germ line cells. In viruses, for
example, there is really no useful distinction between mutation and the
acquisition of new traits. If meanings are considered to be memes, unliv-
ing but evolving ‘symbionts’ of language users, the misdirection disap-
pears. When Jane Q. Public’s meaning of the word ‘marriage’ evolves –
perhaps without her realizing it – this is no more Lamarckian than her
unwitting acquisition of a mutant strain of Covid-19. This shift in perspec-
tive comes in handy on p100, where Richard says

      It is natural to describe the members of our little family as literally sharing a
      vocabulary. Saying that, we can’t identify the words of the shared vocabulary
      with feature sets—collections of morphological, phonological, syntactic, and
      semantic properties manifested in the user’s speech. For if that’s what words
      are, our family members do not have common words for ‘coﬀee’, ‘eat’, and
      ‘mother’. If we are going to describe the family in the natural way, we need
      to think of words in some other way. What seems apt is to think of them in
      something like the way that we are taught in high school to think of genes.
      Genes come in diﬀerent ‘versions’—alleles—and diﬀerent members of a
      species will vary as to which alleles of a particular gene they have. Likewise,
      words come in diﬀerent versions, and Matt, Noah, and Diane have diﬀerent ver-
      sions of the same words. If this is how we think of things, then linguistic indi-
      viduals—embodied lexicons—are not stable in the way that embodied
      genomes are, for such things as morphology, phonology, and syntactic and
      semantic roles in a lexicon change over time.

No, words are not like genes; they are like viruses and bacteria. And ‘lin-
guistic individuals – embodied lexicons’ are more perspicuously seen as
having something like a microbiome, a huge population of unrelated
symbionts, some very useful, even essential for life, and others quite dele-
terious in their eﬀects on their hosts. One of the great contributions of
evolutionary thinking here – and I think Richard recognizes this, but
doesn’t stress it, is that when a process is a variety of natural selection,
things can happen that aren’t just caused; there are reasons why they
                                                                   INQUIRY       631


happen, reasons that nobody needs to formulate or appreciate – free-
ﬂoating rationales, as I have called them (1983, 2017).
   While I am drawing attention to worthy compatriots who have escaped
Richard’s notice, I must add linguist Daniel Dor’s remarkable work, The
Instruction of Imagination (Harvard Univ. Press, 2014), which somehow
fell deadborn from the press and has received scant attention from the
linguists and philosophers of language who could beneﬁt from it, if
only by discovering novel objections to the novel arguments he
advances. He, like many others, has still not appreciated the power of
evolutionary thinking (and especially the power of free-ﬂoating ratio-
nales) but his particular ways of resisting the pull of Chomsky’s version
of nativism, and his appreciation of the role of Richard’s ICGs, makes
him unignorable, in my view, by those who are waking up from their Car-
tesian reveries.
   We are all familiar with the language mavens who insist on the ‘rules’ of
‘proper English’ and we have learned at long last to look askance at their
editorial edicts about ‘correct pronunciation’ and whether it is OK to blithely
split an inﬁnitive, a practice up with which they will not put. We should
recognize that treating meanings as timeless is just another tenet of this
schoolmarmish and unmotivatable ideology. Things shift. Communication
continues. Laying down the law in dictionaries is an obsolete idea. Stipu-
lated meanings in formal systems are OK, but we need to remember that
these are special cases, deliberately frozen in time, so to speak. A proper
semantics of natural language will look more like biology than geometry.


Disclosure statement
No potential conﬂict of interest was reported by the authors .



References
Chalmers, David. 1995. “Facing Up to the Problem of Consciousness.” Journal of
  Consciousness Studies 2: 200–219.
Dennett, Daniel C. 1983. “Intentional Systems in Cognitive Ethology: The “Panglossian
  Paradigm” Defended.” Behavioral and Brain Sciences 6: 343–390.
Dennett, Daniel C. 1991a. Consciousness Explained. Boston: Little, Brown.
Dennett, Daniel C. 1991b. “Real Patterns.” The Journal of Philosophy 88 (1): 27–51.
Dennett, Daniel C. 2005. Sweet Dreams: Philosophical Obstacles to a Science of
  Consciousness. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Dennett, Daniel C. 2013. Intuition Pumps and Other Tools for Thinking. New York: W.W.
  Norton & Co.
632       D. DENNETT


Dennett, Daniel C. 2017. From Bacteria to Bach and Back: The Evolution of Minds.
  New York: W.W. Norton & Co.
Dor, Daniel. 2014. The Instruction of Imagination. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
  Press.
Millikan, Ruth. 1984. Language, Thought and Other Biological Categories, Beyond
  Concepts. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Millikan, Ruth. 2017. Beyond Concepts: Unicepts, Language, and Natural Information.
  Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Quine, W. V. O. 1951. “Two Dogmas of Empiricism.” The Philosophical Review 60 (1):
  20–42.
Quine, W. V. O. 1960. Word and Object. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Quine, W. V. O. 1965. The Stratiﬁcation of Behavior. Schwayder, DS: Humanities Press.
