Critical Review of
Intemational Social and
Political Philosophy
===
fRRetecae_
ISSN: (Print) (Online)Journalhomepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/fcri20
ISSN: (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/fcri20
“The roots (and routes) of the epistemology of
ignorance”
“The roots (and routes) ofthe epistemology of
ignorance”
Linda Martín Alcoff
Linda Martin Alcoff
To cite this article: Linda Martín Alcoff (2024) “The roots (and routes) of the epistemology of
ignorance”, Critical Review of International Social and Political Philosophy, 27:1, 9-28, DOI:
10.1080/13698230.2024.2305011
To cite this article: Linda Martin Alcoff (2024) “The roots (and routes) of the epistemology of
ignorance”, Critical Review of International Social and Political Philosophy, 27:1, 9-28, DOI:
10.1080/13698230.2024.2305011
To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/13698230.2024.2305011
To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/13698230.2024.2305011
ele
é
8
.
.
.
e.e
Critical Review of International Social and Political
Philosophy
Critical Review of International Social and Political
Routledge
Taylor&Francis Group
Published online: 25 Jan 2024.
sed Published online: 25Jan 2024.
o
(Sg
Submit your article to this journal
Submit your article to thisjournal @
lil
IQ View related articles
h
View related articles
Article views: 192
4
® View Crossmark data@
View Crossmark data
CrossMark
Article views: 192
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=fcri20
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=fcri20
CRISPP

CRITICAL REVIEW OF INTERNATIONAL SOCIAL AND POLITICAL PHILOSOPHY
2024, VOL. 27, NO. 1, 9–28
https://doi.org/10.1080/13698230.2024.2305011
ARTICLE
Routledge
Taylor & Francis Group
B) Check for updates
“The roots (and routes) of the epistemology of
ignorance”
Linda Martín Alcoff
Departments of Philosophy, Graduate Center and Hunter College, City University of New York
ABSTRACT
This paper elaborates on the idea of the epistemology of ignorance developed
in Charles Mills’s work beginning in the 1980s and continuing throughout his
writings. I I argue that his account developed initially from experiences of
racism in north America as well as certain methods of organizing within parts
of the Caribbean left. Essentially the epistemic practice of ignorance causes
knowers to discredit or push away knowledge they in fact have. But this gives us
cause for hope, for restoring existing knowledge through changing ideas about
who knows.
KEYWORDS Epistemology; ignorance; racism; Charles Mills
There is no question that the large body of philosophical writing that Charles
Mills wrote in his lifetime was inspired by his desire to aid in the struggle for
economic and racial justice in the Caribbean. He loved his home country of
Jamaica and keenly felt the pain of exile that had begun in his mid-twenties
when he traveled to north America for graduate work in philosophy. But he
had always planned to end the exile in his retirement. His first book, The
Racial Contract, a work that famously develops a succinct but revelatory
picture of the racially based European colonial project, was born of his
awareness of the transnational predation still hobbling the political and
economic sovereignty of Caribbean countries. The continuous character of
this predation was in no small measure enabled by Britain’s refusal to
acknowledge the long after-effects of their colonial rule.
Toward the end of this book, Mills suggests that we need to think about
the epistemological ideas and practices that protect a massive white
ignorance about both this history as well as current structural racisms in
the colonial center. This is essential if we are to understand how racism
became entrenched in the patterns of economic and social life long after
formal colonialism ended. Ignorance has been enabled and reproduced
generation after generation, thwarting efforts to achieve cross-racial class
CONTACT Linda Martín Alcoff
lalcoff@gc.cuny.edu
© 2024 Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group
39071LN0Y

10
L. M. ALCOFF
solidarity, no doubt one of the central aims of elites. Mills found the idea
of an enabled ignorance also useful in making sense of the systematic
omissions he found in the traditions of Western political philosophy, the
very texts that understand themselves to be offering theoretical elabora­
tions of justice at the highest level of reasoning. How can such thinkers
live in the same world we experience every day, and yet all but ignore
issues of racism in their philosophical writings? How is it that even the
class struggle has so often been presented by the liberatory tradition in
a de-raced way? How can we be expected to teach the canon of modern
liberal political theory without mentioning much less discussing the role of
these figures – Locke, Hume, Kant, John Stuart Mill, and so on – in the
slave trade, in formulating the laws of slavery, in promoting racist ideolo­
gies, in justifying colonialism?
For Mills, as I will show here, the epistemology of ignorance is a useful
concept to apply to all levels of society. Every community seems to protect its
ignorance about certain issues, such as male dominance, the existence of
sexual fluidity, ongoing epidemics of sexual violence in our midst, and so on.
Yet the ignorance promulgated in elite spaces is regularly resisted and dis­
rupted, not to mention laughed about behind the safe space of closed doors,
by non-elites of varied sorts. Thus, it is important to complicate the field of
operations here in which specific types of ignorance thrive. In fact, the idea of
a widespread, structurally supported ignorance about racist realities is in no
way news to those targeted. Yet Mills turns to this concept as a way to give
a theoretical articulation to the phenomenon so that it can generate more
attention, analysis, and investigation, as it indeed it has since the publication
of The Racial Contract.
Mills had a great respect for the long indigenous tradition of resistance in
Jamaica and Caribbean societies in general that continues to inspire and
sustain struggles around the world. For Mills, this tradition includes not
only the many influential theorists, writers, and poets that come from this
region, but, also, the popular music, dance and practical forms of everyday life
that express collective dignity, solidarity, and, sometimes, insubordination.
His essay on ‘smadditizin’, a creole word used to convey the idea of ‘becom­
ing somebody,’ interprets it as an articulation of the idea of having one’s
personhood recognized. The need to assert one’s personhood surely
informed the concept he began to use in his work on Kant: the idea of the
‘sub-person’, or untermenschen. Mills used this concept to make sense of the
limits Kant had in mind when he espoused universalist sounding claims that
were not in fact intended to extend to all. Those denied full personhood knew
they had to assert it, demand it, and win it, such as the concept ‘smadditizin’
implies, rather than assume it as a birthright.
Mills’s critique of major figures such as Kant and Rawls was generally based
on close readings toward engaging the internal interpretive debates among

CRITICAL REVIEW OF INTERNATIONAL SOCIAL AND POLITICAL PHILOSOPHY
11
philosophers, but he was also aware that such arguments don’t always need
to be made to the victims of colonialism. What they need is a plan.
As this paper will show, Mills believed there was an underappreciated
political sophistication of everyday folks, an already existing activity of resis­
tance outside the armature of formal education that provides a clear and
powerful way to resist as well as reformulate the self and the community. In
his paper on smadditizin Mills also discussed Rex Nettleford’s account of
dance as central to cultural resistance, as a public performance that demon­
strates one’s own personhood as well as a valorization of one’s particular
embodiment. This popular resistance is an important resource in the struggle
against ignorance if it can be brought forward. In his collection of essays on
the Caribbean, Mills’s epigraph cites Bob Marley, who succinctly conveys the
agenda of cognitive liberation with the lines, ‘Emancipate yourselves from
mental slavery; None but ourselves can free our minds.’
Thus in this paper I explore what is perhaps a little known aspect of his work
on the epistemology of ignorance, that is, its source in his Caribbean experi­
ences as a political activist. This source is both productively generative and
cautionary as we’ll see. It reveals that practices of ignorance are not cotermi­
nous with white ignorance, even if the latter comprises a rather large enter­
prise. But to get the full picture of the concept, we first need to understand
what Mills meant to convey by it, and for this, it is useful to begin with the Orcs.
In an essay that was not published in his lifetime, but that has been
recently published in The Southern Journal of Philosophy by the efforts of his
literary executor, Chike Jeffers, Mills develops a devastating analysis of the
beloved, and much celebrated, fantasy trilogy The Lord of the Rings written
by J.R.R. Tolkien. Mills calls it a racist tract. To be clear, Mills was an avid, life-
long consumer of fantasy and science fiction and wrote a futuristic short story
in high school that was published in the school paper, garnering a lot of talk
among the students for its nightmare qualities. So Mills comes at Tolkien with
the expertise of a devotee.
I suspect that from early on Mills recognized the opportunities for social
criticism these genres can generate, as well as the chance to work through
various kinds of philosophical thought experiments. This is the point of his own
teenage story, which concerned how two friends respond to global cata­
strophe. But at some point in his life, Mills also came to see fantasy genres as
the psychoanalytic record of white hysteria, in which one could read the fears
and desires about racial amalgamation, as well as the apprehension about
future vengeance from the oppressed, playing out in mainstream domains
beloved by liberal publics. Given this interpretation, one does not need to
read something like the Turner Diaries; one only needs to read Tolkien.
Mills calls the Lord of the Rings ‘a literal transcription of one of the most
malignant ideologies of the past millennium: the racist “Aryan Myth” which, in
one form or another, would ultimately justify both the conquest and mass

12
L. M. ALCOFF
murder of the non-white world by Europeans, and the later Nazi genocide of
Europeans themselves’ (Mills, 2022, p. 107). His argument centers on the
striking symmetry between the ranked creatures of Middle Earth and the
racist ranking of colonialism. Just as the three sons of Noah from the Bible are
continually used to explain the different fates of whites and nonwhites as well
as among different ‘types’ of whites, so too are the distinct characteristics of
elves, dwarves, hobbits, men and orcs used to explain their differential moral
status. Elves, hobbits, men and dwarves form the coalition against the evil
wizards of Mordor and their mindless Orc warriors, but the intellectual,
aesthetic and physical differences between the first four categories of beings
mimic the way that ethnic distinctions among white Europeans are often
portrayed, with some accompanying status differences. (There are strongly
built Russians, small gentle Belgians, the Irish who love their drink, and so on.)
The Orcs are portrayed by Tolkien in a way that is sharply contrasted from
these other groups. They are swarthy, dark, and wild, with skin tones and eye
shapes that signify as both black and ‘Oriental.’ They also speak, weirdly, with
cockney accents. Mills suggests that, together, these characteristics worked
well for British audiences to signify both class and racial ‘types’: appropriate
for subordinate roles and serviceable for difficult labor such as working in the
mines or the military. Most tellingly, the mass murder of the Orcs in the
various battles is portrayed by Tolkien as a triumph without any moral
ambiguity. Unlike other groups in the Lord of the Rings, the Orcs are presented
with no historical narrative by which we might understand their actions or
motivations. Nor do they have a single admirable quality: their stereotyped
features are flatlined as negative. The earth is better off without them.
Thus, there is a clear resonance between the project of genocidal racism as
portrayed in The Lord of the Rings, and the genocidal violence perpetrated
throughout the period of European colonialism that was justified as a triumph
of civilization over savages. This becomes central to Mills’s developing theory
of how the epistemic practices that protect ignorance work. He argues that
the immense popularity of Tolkien is tied not to the strangeness of Middle
Earth, but to its familiarity. At a deep level, this stratified world with dispo­
sable types of beings is entirely recognizable. The novels so easily animate
our emotions of identification, of sympathy, of fear and of anguish, because
the mythic world they portray is one we know, one we in fact inhabit. The
mass of Orcs threatening the peaceful idylls of the hobbits’ Shire, with its
olde-English rural romanticism, mimics the fear the West continues to have
about invading, mindless, and violent mobs, and mobs who are not ‘like us’
but ethno-racially distinct and different looking. Mills suggests that the Shire
simultaneously represents ‘the outnumbered aristocracy surrounded by the
shrieking mob, the colonial outpost about to be overrun by insurgent natives,
the Christian West against the hordes of Saracens, Turks, Mongols’ (Mills,
2022, p. 127). In other words, the reader, such as my 12 year old self who

CRITICAL REVIEW OF INTERNATIONAL SOCIAL AND POLITICAL PHILOSOPHY
13
fell in love with the Hobbits’ land and identified with their struggle, is not
completely ignorant of the racial undertones of the story, but enlivened by it
precisely because it is familiar to what we already know, and fear.
I want to suggest that this is precisely how the epistemology of
ignorance often works as Mills develops his concept. Ignorance does not
require an effective or complete erasure as in the case of false information
reports that mislead a gullible public into accepting lies. Rather, ignorance
operates as an intentional pushing down or pushing away of what one
knows, making it latent or casting it to the back of one’s mind. The parallel
between the groups in Middle Earth and modern Earth is too obvious to
be truly unknown or unconscious. Thus, ignorance in this sort of case is
not an absence of knowing, but an intentional stance toward what one
knows. In the case of The Lord of the Rings, the genocide of the orcs is
consistent with a central set of ideas that have legitimated violence by
Europeans since the Crusades, and is ‘fully within that tradi­
tion.’(2022, 128)
Accepting the portrayal of the Orcs that Tolkien offers works to morally
absolve the reader for desiring a racial massacre even while most readers are
likely to desire exactly this, that Middle Earth will be cleansed of the Orc’s
presence by the end of the final volume of the Trilogy (as does happen). We
might differentiate between different reactions by different reading publics,
but colonized subjects, such as myself and Mills, too often identify with the
West, the light, the civilized, the ‘advanced’, and engage along with others in
the pushing down of contrary evidence and concerns. I’ll return to this disturb­
ing thought later on.
In order to situate Mills’s contributions to the epistemology of ignorance, it
will be helpful to turn next to a brief overview of the development of this field.
The discussion of ignorance in recent decades is expansive, although it is
more developed in psychology, sociology and education than in philosophy.
Ignorance is now studied widely not as a lack or a defect or the product of
simply getting false information but as intentional and often systemic. In
other words, while individuals may intentionally avoid certain kinds of knowl­
edge, ignorance can also be socially produced, promoted, excused, and
sometimes enforced. There is much discussion about the choices made by
private tech platforms that allow false claims to be aired, but we also have to
consider the epistemic practices that lead to a positive reception of these
claims, no matter their source. There are certainly individual aspects to this
reception, which has given rise to an account of what have come to be called
‘epistemic vices,’ but there is a social dimension as well that involves group
identity formation and political mobilizations along with the pursuit of cor­
porate profits. Some bad epistemic practices are socially rewarded, thus it has
become clear we must attack the problem at both the individual and the
social level.

14
L. M. ALCOFF
Mills was delighted at the development of the field of social epistemology, but
quickly dismayed at the narrow formulation of the problematic as it was usually
given (see e.g. Mills, 2017, pp. 51–53). Although radical theoretical traditions like
Marxism, feminism, and race theory initiated work on ideology and systemic
social exclusions, this source was being overlooked. For example, in Alvin
Goldman’s influential 1999 book, Knowledge in a Social World, Mills writes,
the implications of systemic social oppression for his project are not addressed.
The picture of ‘society’ he is working with is one that—with perhaps a few
unfortunate exceptions—is inclusive and harmonious. (Mills, 2017, p. 52)
Mills knew that, despite Goldman’s and others’ (feigned?) ignorance, the field
of social epistemology had been instigated by work in feminist philosophy
over the 1980s and 1990s. Harding (1986), Code (1991), Longino (1990),
Michele Le Doeuff (1981) and others were showing how dominant knowl­
edges were skewed by the homogeneity of the social identities involved (see
Mills, 1988). Perhaps it was because the ‘new’ field of social epistemology
denied ties to these forerunners that ignorance was taken to be a deviation
rather than a norm, marginalizing the sort of issues Mills focused on such as
white ignorance. Mills finds almost no mention in the mainstream philoso­
phical work of racial group identity as a factor relevant to understanding the
social conditions of cognition, even a decade after Goldman’s book. And he
contrasts this with the fact that white ignorance is a veritable theme in African
American fiction and non-fiction.
If some of us had shared Mills’s hope that the development of social
epistemology would make epistemology itself more relevant, rescuing it
from the dead-end of the Gettier debates that occupied it for so many
decades, the narrowness of the dominant framework in this new field sinks
our hopes once again.
Still, the post-Quinean and naturalistic trend in epistemology exemplified
in the work of people like Hilary Kornblith opened the door to a wider set of
critical topics (see Nelson, 1990). In 2003, Robert Proctor and Londa
Schiebinger organized a conference on agnotology, or the study of ignor­
ance, and the work of Nancy Tuana, Iain Boal, Michael Betancourt, Irvin Schick
expanded the discussion in several directions. The study of ignorance con­
tinues to grow: one of the recent Routledge Handbooks is devoted to the
topic.
Yet some of the work on ignorance is focused rather narrowly on the
spread of false information by tobacco and oil companies, pharmaceuticals,
and political leaders. Or the focus is on non-elites while leaving the main­
stream intellectual classes exempt. The Russian born science fiction writer
Isaac Asimov held that the U.S. has a ‘cult of ignorance,’ thus giving more of
a culturalist explanation of the problem than a political one. But others,
notably Betancourt, argue that a disengagement with our social reality

CRITICAL REVIEW OF INTERNATIONAL SOCIAL AND POLITICAL PHILOSOPHY
15
enables capitalism to function, thus locating support for ignorance in our
political economy. New theories about ‘structural information bubbles’ and
‘information deserts’ point to group differences in basic knowledge, although
these problems are sometimes called ‘passive’ causes of ignorance in a way
that disables an analysis of group motives (on this topic see Bayruns García,
2020, 2021).
What one needs, Mills argued, is an account of why ignorance about
racism and colonialism is so pervasive, why it has infected so much scholar­
ship and, in particular, political philosophy, and not simply the non-academic
sphere. And what we very much need is a corrective epistemic plan. Simply
presenting the evidence is clearly inadequate because there are standard
epistemic practices at all levels of society that disrupt reception, disqualify
claims, delegitimate scholars, and in fact demonize the messenger.
There is a precursor of these discussions about ignorance in Freud. His
concepts of denial and repression explore the psychic defense mechanisms
that allow people to avoid aspects of reality that challenge our equilibrium.
Ignorance, in this sense, enhances our capacity to function. But, of course, this
too needs political analysis: what sort of functioning requires denial? And
whose? And what, in particular, must be denied? Denial and repression are
not exclusive to dominant groups; oppressed persons also have trouble
getting out of bed to face the social realities of their lives, and facing history
is as painful for those who may be related to the victims as for those who may
be related to the victimizers, though in different ways. Concepts of denial and
repression are useful for analyzing these diverse affective motivations (see
e.g. Morgan, 2021).
With this brief overview we can now situate Mills’s contributions to the
developing discussion of ignorance. I will argue in what follows that his work
lays out the major political conditions that foster the epistemic practices of
ignorance, relating these to group positionality and identifications. He also
targets specific philosophical trends and begins to point us toward solutions.
First, let us recall how Charles articulates the idea of the epistemology of
ignorance. The first substantial articulation of the concept is in The Racial
Contract, published in 1997, where he says1:
The requirements of ‘objective’ cognition, factual and moral, in a racial polity
are in a sense more demanding in that officially sanctioned reality is divergent
from actual reality. So here, it could be said, one has an agreement to mis­
interpret the world. One has to learn to see the world wrongly, but with the
assurance that this set of mistaken perceptions will be validated by white
epistemic authority, whether religious or secular. (Mills 1997, 18)
We should note here an ambiguity in this initial formulation. He states that an
individual learns to know wrongly and is rewarded for this with social valida­
tion, but does the ignorant truly believe, or go along to get along? We might

16
L. M. ALCOFF
also ask whether the social validation is necessary precisely because the
individual is uncertain about what one takes to be true.
Mills continues—
Thus in effect, on matters related to race, the Racial Contract prescribes for its
signatories an inverted epistemology, an epistemology of ignorance,
a particular pattern of localized and global cognitive dysfunctions (which are
psychologically and socially functional), producing the ironic outcome that
whites will in general be unable to understand the world they themselves
have made. [. . .] To a significant extent, then, white signatories will live in
an invented delusional world, a racial fantasyland . . . ” (Mills 1997, 18;
emphasis in original)
This idea is not new to Charles in 1997, however. In an earlier work, ‘Alternative
Epistemologies’ published in 1988, he writes that ‘the processes of cognizing
validated by the dominant perspective are . . . inadequate . . . ’ (1988, 237) In
order to develop an analysis of this defective form of cognition, Mills sets out
here what in hindsight we would call, citing Mills himself, a non-ideal approach
to epistemology in which our aim is not to establish universal epistemic norms
but corrective ones. The ‘Alternative Epistemologies’ he explores in his 1988
paper – which include Marxism, feminism, and Black philosophy – do not
assume an unspecified, abstract, fungible knower. Nor do they aim for
a generalized analysis of memory, perception, or belief formation or a new
solution to the Gettier problem. Instead, they offer a critique of just this sort of
decontextualized formulation of the problematic of epistemology. In a later
essay he says such abstract approaches invokes the idea of ‘an imposing and
lofty mansion somewhere in the clouds, Nowhere Towers, which is the House
of Philosophy’ inside of which ‘we find colourless “men” at work on the great
enterprise: investigating the joints of the furniture, tapping the walls,’ etc.
So it is clear that Mills’s oeuvre was marked by a persistent interest in the
question of knowledge in relationship to power and group oppression. And it
is also clear that he did not believe the lofty mansion in the clouds, in which
many philosophers imagine themselves, would be the place where such
questions could be raised, much less adequately answered. Further, as we
will see further on, he saw the very construction of the Nowhere Towers as
a project with a politics.
In what follows, I want to mark out two specific moments early in Mills’s career
that inspired his development of the concept of the epistemology of ignorance.
Noting these will help to understand his intent in developing the concept. I will
also draw out the connection of ignorance to the provocative claim Charles
made, in his Mills, 2018 APA Presidential Address, that Rawl’s political theory was
a form of ‘whitopia.’ To make this argument, Mills made prodigious references to
popular science fiction and fantasy once again, connecting typical elements of
these genres to Rawls’ own portrayal of a just society.

CRITICAL REVIEW OF INTERNATIONAL SOCIAL AND POLITICAL PHILOSOPHY
17
So to begin, the first experience in Mills’s career that motivated his
interest in ignorance occurred in his first year of teaching at the University
of Oklahoma in 1987. He was teaching a graduate seminar on Marx and
decided to organize the section on ideology around an example that he
thought would be familiar and interesting to the students. So, for this
class, he relates,
I led off casually with ‘OK, so as you all know, white racism and the subordina­
tion of blacks has been central to US history. Now the explanations given . . . ’
But I never got to the explanations given; indeed, the prepared lecture was
never delivered. What I had taken to be an uncontroversial truism, something
everybody knew about the United States, was vigorously denied by my class.
White racism had not been central to US history, blacks had not been subordi­
nated . . . I felt I had stepped into a looking glass world. (2010, 16)
Here was the impetus both for his subsequent work on white ignorance as
well as his critique of ideal theory, which he believed played a major role in
perpetuating white ignorance among the intellectual classes. These were not
uneducated people but graduate students in philosophy. He began to think
of white ignorance about racial domination not as a simple amnesia or lack of
knowledge but one that must be cultivated. The cultivation was certainly
systemic (in e.g. curriculum requirements) but it must also involve individual
agency, since one’s more natural or immediate perceptual attunements of
the social world in which they live must be dismantled and disempowered.
What is notable in his description of the Oklahoma classroom experience is
how surprised he was, a surprise likely linked to his status as a recent
immigrant from Jamaica. Jolted by his students’ adamance about the absence
of racism, Mills resolved to start ‘reading outside of philosophy, in history,
sociology, and political science . . . ’ (Mills, 2010, p. 21) He understood that
Marxist philosophy would not be entirely sufficient to explain white amnesia,
and yet he took as his model for thinking about race the approach Marx took
to class, adapting the method of structural analysis to reveal a historically and
socially constructed form of identity and rank. Also like Marx in regard to
class, Mills’s approach to race was never focused on individual intention, or
attitudinal racism, as a form of moral failing. He did not deny the importance
of such intentions, and their lethal power, but he was more interested in the
social production, organization, and rationalization of such intentions and
attitudes. And he knew that this topic would require a focus on the sub-field
of epistemology in order to explain how graduate students over 30 years ago
could uniformly and ‘vigorously’ deny the persistence of racism.
The second source of inspiration for conceptualizing ignorance was during
the same decade, the 1980s, but in this instance not centered on race but on
class and his evolving critique of left-wing vanguardism. This source of his
concept of the epistemology of ignorance has received much less attention.

18
L. M. ALCOFF
Mills endeavored to contribute to the liberation of Jamaica from neo-
colonial rule by joining the Workers Party of Jamaica in the 1970s. This was
a fairly orthodox party with a Leninist organizational form. Because it called
for revolution it had to operate with some care and subterfuge whether in
Jamaica or Canada (where it was also active among the large Caribbean
population in Toronto where Mills lived for a decade). Mills was himself
circumspect about his membership since his own family held positions in
the liberal government, and they were none too pleased by the WJP’s strong
criticisms of Michael Manley.
The Caribbean, like the U.S., had many Marxist-Leninist parties in the
1970s. A key issue of debate among these groups was what we then called
‘the national question’ – concerning the nature of the subordination of
racialized groups such as African Americans, Mexicans and Puerto Ricans.2
The influential race theorist Eduardo Bonilla-Silva has recounted how his
group in Puerto Rico exhibited disdain against those tendencies that
emphasized ‘the national question’. Although anti-racism was considered
important (sometimes more so than women’s rights or, heaven forbid, gay
rights), still, the national question was secondary to the class struggle.
(This was not true of all Marxist or Marxist-Leninist parties – some in the
U.S. understood the connection of race and class to be the central
contradiction).
The WJP was similar to the one Bonilla-Silva describes, and like Mills, it was
only when Bonilla-Silva traveled to the U.S. and experienced anti-Puerto Rican
racism that he began to modify his social analysis. But Mills’s theoretical
development from a class-centric approach to the sort of multi-axial
approach most radicals accept today was also connected to his thinking
about the epistemology of ignorance, I want to argue. Like Stuart Hall, Mills
came to be influenced by Gramsci’s idea of an organic intellectual who would
maintain a connection with the people, develop a collaborative pedagogy,
and thus redress the problematic gap between the mass and the radical
intellectuals (Mills, 2010, p. 138).
The effect of orthodox Marxism was often to neglect close analysis of local
conditions, local resistance, and popular thought, especially those expressed
in cultural forms such as Rastafarianism. In the Caribbean this neglect of local
conditions gained support from the elitist tendencies of college educated
middle class folks in the party, helping to reenforce a neglect of race and of
colorism.
In Jamaica, as Mills explains,
given the regional history of imperial domination structured ideologically
around the central pillars of the superiority of Western culture and thought,
and the denigration of nonwhite peoples, it is natural that the most important
indigenous oppositional ideologies should revolve around race. (pan-
Africanism, Negritude, Rastafari) (Mills, 2010, p. 152)

CRITICAL REVIEW OF INTERNATIONAL SOCIAL AND POLITICAL PHILOSOPHY
19
Yet Marxist orthodoxy in the region portrayed these trends as mystical and
irrational and confined itself to the investigation of purportedly universal and
scientific laws of class exploitation (2020, 153). This begins to sound like the
mansion in the sky he describes earlier as the House of Philosophy. And Mills
suggests this is also what has led to the dismissal of Marxism as a ‘white man’s
ideology’ (Mills, 2010, p. 152).
Mills does not agree with this definitive dismissal of Marxism. In the
introduction to his Mills, 2003 book, From Class to Race, he explains very
clearly that this title ‘should not be taken in the spirit of a complete repudia­
tion of Marxism, since I do think that a modified historical materialism might
be able to carry out an adequate conceptualization of the significance of race’
(Mills, 2003, xvi-xvii). His concern was that most white Marxists had not
demonstrated a willingness to undertake the thorough rethinking required
to address the ways in which race organized capital from the very beginning.
Thus, as he goes on to say in 2003, he will ‘bracket the question of the
possibility of a theoretical synthesis . . . to focus on racial oppression as
a system in its own right.’ (2003, xvii) This work, he hoped, could contribute
to an eventual synthesis. And, as he writes in another retrospective essay, ‘the
whole point of my framework was that race is not foundational, but brought
into existence by other forces’ and that, if pressed, he would locate the
‘genesis and evolution of white supremacy . . . [to be] the history of
European expansionism’(2010, 23).
Rather than rejecting Marxism wholesale, then, Mills was similar to many
other Marxists from the global south who preferred multi-axial explanations
that challenge the ‘base-superstructure’ model in which a de-raced version of
class is central because it is located in the base while sexism and racism are
identified only in the superstructure.3 Stuart Hall, a major influence on Mills,
has suggested that Gramsci’s attentiveness to cultural specificity and the
need for an organic intellectual practice embedded in local conditions was
tied to the fact that he was from southern Italy and understood the power of
ethno-racial essentializing for the production of hegemony, the organization
of labor, and the ways in which the popular classes could be divided from one
another. Building on this, Mills began to argue that it was the epistemic
practices of orthodox parties that made it impossible to develop new ana­
lyses in the dialogic mode of the Gramscian organic intellectual, which could
have generated more substantive engagement with race and indigeneity.
This is the key point I want to develop, that the underplaying of race and
racism in many Marxist movements was occurring because of an elitist
epistemology and Eurocentric approach to theory as practiced by some
vanguard parties, particularly Stalinist ones.4 As he argues in his 1994 paper
‘The Moral Epistemology of Stalinism,’ the problem is that the good
Communist begins to suspect their own cognitive practices, judgments and
perceptions as unreliable, thus demobilizing what might operate as guards

20
L. M. ALCOFF
against dogmatic thinking and producing a form of protected ignorance
(2010, 89–120). In the anglophone Caribbean this combination of orthodoxy
and dogmatism had the effect of dismissing forms of resistance that did not
fit the European mold of class struggle.
The main event that spurred Mills to new thinking on these matters
involved a crisis in the Caribbean left that occurred in the early 1980s
when Charles was heavily involved. He wrote extensively about this in an
essay published in 1990, ‘Getting out of the Cave’ whose subtitle was
‘Tensions between Democracy and Elitism in Marx’s Theory of Cognitive
Liberation.’ The crisis involved another island in the anglophone
Caribbean: Grenada.
U.S. leftists may primarily remember Grenada as the target of
a U.S. invasion in 1983 that toppled the government. This was the first overt
military overthrow by the U.S. since the end of the Vietnam War in 1975
(they’d shown remarkable patience to hold back a whole 8 years). The
Grenadian invasion was viewed by many as part of the proxy war between
the U.S. and the Soviet Union.
Prior to the invasion, there was a revolution in Grenada in 1979. Barely five
years after it gained its independence from Britain, the socialist New Jewel
movement (which stood for Joint Endeavor for Welfare, Education, and
Liberation) overthrew an unpopular and corrupt government. This was an
event that understandably rocked the Caribbean: a small left party ousted
a repressive government in a mostly peaceful revolution and gained mass
support for its socialist agenda. Both the Nicaraguan Sandinista revolution
and the Iranian revolution occurred in the same year. It began to look as if
U.S. power had a limit (See Lewis et al., 2015).
Mills’s own party in Jamaica was understandably inspired, but unfortu­
nately the Grenadian revolution ended in disaster within a few short years.
Although some suspect covert operations may have played a role, the 1983
U.S. invasion was not the precipitating event. Rather, disputes among the
leadership of the People’s Revolutionary Government led to the execution of
the popular Maurice Bishop, the socialist Prime Minister, and ten others. This
shocked the Caribbean left and had ripple effects throughout the region that
caused it to lose credibility. Mills calls this a ‘tragedy’ and argues that it
resulted from the intellectual methods pursued by the Grenadian parties.
He says:
Emancipatory social movements quickly discover that an essential part of the
battle they must fight is an intellectual one: the struggle (on both external and
internal fronts) for a new vision of the world and of themselves. The overturning
of repressive social hierarchies required not just the organization of opposi­
tional social forces but the development of new modes of understanding. Thus
the striving for cognitive liberation will form a crucial dimension of the emanci­
patory process. (Mills, 2010, p. 128)

CRITICAL REVIEW OF INTERNATIONAL SOCIAL AND POLITICAL PHILOSOPHY
21
He likens this to getting out of Plato’s cave, since it requires combatting the
elitist assumption of ‘’epistemological inequality’ between various members
of the Republic’ (Mills, 2010, p. 130). To be sure, workers are subject, as he
argues, to having ‘simultaneously insight and illusions, truth and misconcep­
tion’ (Mills, 2010, p. 133). The approach of revolutionary intellectuals to
popular consciousness cannot therefore be uncritical. But knowledge is
derived from a ‘specific social matrix’ and the starting point of theory must
be here (Mills, 2010, p. 132).
To formulate his analysis of the failure of the Grenadian revolution, Mills
did a series of interviews in the mid 1980s with eight former members of the
New Jewel movement, and, while protecting their anonymity, he summarizes
and discusses these at length in his 1990 paper. He explores questions about
the role of the intellectual in achieving cognitive liberation, and the effect of
internal class divisions within the party. These topics played a role in his
developing focus on race as well as his account of the epistemology of
ignorance.
Based on his interviews with party members, Mills argued that overcoming
the elitist dangers inherent in vanguard parties required understanding the
specific cultural and colonial histories that produced elitist habits among the
educated classes and self-subordination among the racialized poor. This
required digging deep into the specifically cognitive forms of racial oppres­
sion and foregrounding cognitive liberation, goals that are difficult to
advance with centralist command structures (whether democratic centralism
could work as an antidote is not something he explores). As before, Mills
argues that we need a localized approach to revolutionary political strategies.
The Central Committee of the Soviet communist party cannot assume either
the ability or the right to direct revolutions around the world, using its
material resources as a lever to dictate local party decisions, as they did
notoriously in Cuba. This was not only a political error but an epistemic
one, given the need for a thick understanding of local culture in colonized
societies.
In the Caribbean, a thick understanding would have foregrounded race as
well as class. As one of Charles’ interviewees saw it, the Marxism Leninism
practiced by the New Jewel leadership did not acknowledge ‘the fact that
we’re oppressed as blacks and working class. It alienated many people – it
didn’t relate to their experience. We just closed our minds to developing any
further theory, creating something new.’ (2010, 153)
Mills also begins to develop here a nascently phenomenological take on
ignorance that takes social identity into account. In his discussion of the
dynamics within the Grenadian social movement, his interviewees explain
how they would choose to ignore their own personal knowledge and
experience about how things were working on the ground in the new anti-
colonial government in order to defer to those in the party who could

22
L. M. ALCOFF
wield the theoretical language to direct party strategy. The Grenadian
party consisted of members with multiple class and educational back­
grounds and working class members conveyed feelings of intimidation.
Those who ‘knew the theory’ assumed they knew best and could therefore
‘decide against the majority’ (Mills, 2010, p. 155). Raising questions or
alternative points of view might lead a member to be called out as petit-
bourgeois or counter-revolutionary. Mills takes this as only partly
a problem of party doctrine: this was a small country trying to create
a revolution under a state of siege, with credible military threats and likely
covert action from abroad. He writes that ‘what a state of siege produces is
a siege mentality, in which criticism and dissent are quickly transmutable
into ideological subversion on behalf of the external enemy’ (Mills, 2010,
p. 155). This is a familiar phenomenon for struggles against much more
powerful foes who can use subterfuge of all sorts.
Yet, the state of siege mentality produces disastrous epistemic practices.
He writes that its
overall consequence was a drying up of the necessary feedback about the
implications of decisions and policies. People began to have second thoughts
about expressing their feelings if they did not conform to what ‘the book’ had
said . . . the divisions between people and party grew . . . as did the divisions
between rank-and-file party members and the leadership. (Mills, 2010, p. 156)
In a section of the essay that he entitled ‘The Phenomenology of
Vanguardism’, Mills explains that he is going to offer an ‘empathic reconstruc­
tion of what it must actually have been like in those last few months’ (Mills,
2010, p. 15), that is, leading up to the execution of Bishop. He begins with an
account of the powerful effects of finding a theory such as Marxism that offers
comprehensive explanations of social structures and links these to one’s own
personal experiences. The ‘capacity of Marxism to elucidate connections
between apparently unrelated phenomena is astonishing . . . .the bourgeois
scales seem to fall from your eyes . . . in the holistic illumination that the whole
system is interconnected’ (Mills, 2010, p. 157). The result is an experience of
epistemic transformation: one sees the world differently, has new tools to
assess experiences and relations, and feels empowered by having access to
the explanatory strength of a systematic theory.
In the real world context of political activism that is pursued under a state
of siege, the explanatory theory may appear to be the most powerful tool one
can have. Yet, he argues, it is
purchased at a cost—that cost being a partial break with the axioms of com­
mon sense, the accepted interpretations of everyday experience . . . [so that]
one learns to distrust oneself, to distance oneself from one’s own immediate
spontaneous reactions, feelings and perceptions. (Mills, 2010, pp. 157–158)

CRITICAL REVIEW OF INTERNATIONAL SOCIAL AND POLITICAL PHILOSOPHY
23
This becomes what he calls an anti-empirical stance, in which ‘one starts not
so much to reconceive as to ignore experience’ making party pronounce­
ments ‘immune to empirical refutation.’(2010, 158).
Liberatory theory in this guise becomes a commandist epistemology that
disavows democratic deliberation: the ‘people’ who have not yet been con­
verted ‘are still in the Cave’ so there is no point in consulting their views. The
fact that Maurice Bishop was a popular leader among a wide swath of
Grenadians counted for little. Mills diagnoses this as a degeneration into
forms of idealism and Platonism, overturning the empirical approach Marx
espoused. The result was that party leaders need not pursue consultation and
could preemptively disregard popular will and mass opinion.
To repeat, Mills does not champion a naïve populism against what he calls
out as a misguided vanguardism. He argues that there is an ongoing need for
demystification and a critique of retrogressive ideologies. But he warns that
ideologies can also take the form of vanguardist epistemologies that legit­
imate familiar forms of class elitism. He cites both Marx and Gramsci as
opponents to this: they believed that reason is universally accessible, that
‘everyone is a philosopher and that it is not a question of introducing from
scratch a scientific form of thought into everyone’s individual life, but of
renovating and making “critical” an already existing activity’ (Mills, 2010,
p. 163).
In the context of the Caribbean, Mills believed such an approach would
respect the long indigenous tradition of resistance that has taken not just
musical and practical forms but intellectual forms. His essay on ‘smadditizin’,
the commonly used creole term for ‘becoming somebody’ or having one’s full
personhood recognized, is an attempt to provide an example of already
existing activities of resistance outside of the spaces of formal education
(Mills, 2010, pp. 164–5). Thus, liberatory philosophies need to be attuned to
the already existing forms of local resistance.
Mills’s essay on Grenada was written in the late 1980s, when the
wounds of the Grenadian revolution were still fresh. It is a painful and
risky thing to critique movements to which one feels attached. Mills had
harbored hopes that the efforts to create a pan-Caribbean Left coalition
would strengthen the region’s ability to withstand global capitalist forces;
these hopes were dashed after the U.S. launched a full scale invasion of
Grenada. But by the time the U.S. had invaded the government had
already lost its base of support and was widely viewed as illegitimate
because of the assassination of Bishop. As I believe is clear, the point of
Mills’ analysis is not to justify the invasion but point to mechanisms that
might make our movements stronger and better able to withstand them.
Vanguardism and the state of siege mentality gave support for some
epistemic practices that were probably already familiar to more elite
party members: disregarding rank and file input and assuming the

24
L. M. ALCOFF
superiority of imported theory and influence over local activists, no matter
how embedded they were in the local culture. But it also inculcated
epistemic practices in which the non-elites in the party, those who had
less formal education, discounted their own reasoning and accepted the
need to defer. This investigation clearly inspired Mills to explore ignorance
as a ‘cultivated amnesia’ or intentional practice.
In this final section I want to consider how Mills saw the epistemology of
ignorance applying to the mainstream canon of Anglo-European political
theory. He saw this as manifested in its neglect of topics of racism and
colonialism but also in the fact that there seemed to be little interest in
engaging with the work of the many political theorists of color who
addressed these issues over the last century. It is hardly surprising that the
most influential works in the field offer no help in redressing structural
historical injustice and, in fact, contribute to ignorance by characterizing
Western societies as liberal democracies with a few deviations. This he calls
out as moral evasion and moral complicity (Mills, 2018, p. 71).
In his Mills, 2018 Presidential Address, Mills provocatively called Rawls’
theory of justice a whitopia. Rawls’ theory may have useful elements, he allows,
but it imagines society as a cooperative venture for mutual advantage whose
principles of justice are democratically agreed upon. The just society it subse­
quently assembles, then, is shaped by the assumption of a white polity with
a shared history of voluntary migration. To portray the United States in this way
is thus the product of an epistemology of ignorance (Mills, 2018, p. 51).
Mills holds that there are actually ‘two main varieties of whitopia, both in
practice and in theory’ (Mills, 2018, p. 51). In the first, white domination is overt
and unapologetically defended, while in the second, ‘white domination is
generally denied, and differential white privilege is masked . . . ’ (Mills, 2018,
p. 52). In the case of Rawls, ignoring structural historical injustice seems to be
motivated by a typical philosophical attempt to reduce the variables: skim
down the project’s formulation of the questions to the least number of ele­
ments so that one can make progress on formulating answers (and here he is
making good use of O’Neill’s, 1987 critique of philosophical abstraction). This
method allows Rawls to narrow the scope of distributive justice, focusing only
on the domestic sphere of a society in presentist form, without attending either
to its past or its relations with other societies. And within that limited sphere,
Rawls bases his analysis on what Olufemi O. Taiwo calls a ‘snapshot view’ that
takes the current moment as if it were independent of any ‘relationships to
what happened yesterday’ (Táíwò, 2022, p. 85). But this, as Taiwo says, gives us
‘incomplete information’ relevant to the issue of justice, supposedly the focal
point of analysis. The result is not only a useless theory but one that obscures
the role of injustice in clarifying the requirements of justice: so that, for
example, Rawls says the more well-off should change things for the benefit
of the worse off simply because they are worse off. This makes Rawlsians (or

CRITICAL REVIEW OF INTERNATIONAL SOCIAL AND POLITICAL PHILOSOPHY
25
those well-off who accept his view) into saviors, as Walter Mignolo calls liberals,
by obscuring how the immediate present was formed by the past.
Mills argued from the publication of his first book, The Racial Contract, that
theories of justice need to take as their starting point the effects of global
colonialism on the current world. The concept of the epistemology of ignor­
ance helpfully names this problem in Rawls’ methodology in a way that is
more politically perspicuous than O’Neill’s assessment of the problem as
abstraction. In his Mills, 2015 essay, ‘Global White Ignorance’ Mills lists the
following as possible causal factors, though some of these are also practices:
socialization into a racist belief-set or a Eurocentric normative starting-point,
inherited culture and tradition, inculcated social amnesia, typically skewed
inferential pattern, deficient conceptual apparatus, material group interest, or
epistemically disadvantaged social-structural location. (Mills, 2015, Routledge
handbook, 218)
Thus, Mills offers a contextualization of the problems of philosophical abstrac­
tion and decontextualization. And in his earlier paper from 2007, ‘White
Ignorance,’ Mills discusses how we need to look at the interactions of parti­
cular forms of ‘perception, conception, memory and testimony.’(2007, 59).
Testimonial injustice has a large impact on collective memory, creating
information bubbles and blocks, he argues, while conception predisposes
the work of our perceptual apparatus such that wrong information may
become the basis of judgment and understandings of our social environment
and our experiences. Concepts can block perception and also drive our
perceptual practices in certain directions. Examples here would include cer­
tain formulations of expertise and intelligence, as we saw in the example of
Grenada, and that also operate in the Western so-called democracies.
Here and elsewhere Mills foregrounds whiteness as the condition that
socializes people into these deficient epistemic practices. But he does not see
whiteness as either necessary or sufficient for an epistemology of ignorance
per se: his focus is analyzing that species of ignorance that is white ignorance,
which is something I’d suggest is unfortunately available to aspirational people
of color who identify with the civilizational claims of Anglo-European domi­
nance. So here we might think about not only identity but also identifications
as playing a role: how does one understand oneself in relation to others, who
does one identify with, and who does one disidentify with?
We can answer that question in regard to Rawls. If the veil of ignor­
ance was working correctly, perhaps he could have seen that the snap­
shot view is not how the formerly colonized see the present world. What
Mills adds here is that white identity has been formed by a historical
experience and historical mythmaking in which colonial settlements were
themselves viewed as utopias: an escape from poverty and European
aristocracies, with minimal government oversight, but which required

26
L. M. ALCOFF
displacement of both peoples and cultures (Mills, 2018, p. 53; see also
Beltrán, 2020). This supports the central claim Charles makes in his
Presidential Address: that utopias always emerge against dystopias, as
something to escape from and something that appears just by virtue of
a contrast. Dystopias, he says, are presented as something required to
pass through on the way to utopia, just as genocide against the Orcs
brings peace to middle earth.
Despite their many agreements, Taiwo takes Mills to task, as many other
theorists did, for not himself developing as vast and comprehensive a theory
of normative political theory as Rawls, for in effect, giving critique without
reconstruction. It is true that Mills himself felt this absence – he had spent so
much of the last decades of his life trying in various ways to get the topic of
race onto the table of political philosophy, and this kept him largely focused
on critique.
But I would suggest that the substantive tools of analysis he left us are
not being given their due. Ignorance can come in the form of cultural
amnesia, but also in strategies that legitimate the invalidation of local and
low-status knowers. Given this, Mills is not going to provide a different
utopia or political theory in as general and universal a way as Rawls, but
a localized and contextual account of justice that attends to what people
on the ground already know. In several places, Mills, like his compatriot
Stuart Hall, uses Gramsci’s work against the tendency of elitism among left
theorists. He says, for example that Gramsci ‘makes explicit that the
intellectual is starting from already-existing insights’ (Mills, 2010, p. 139).
It is Gramsci who says the masses do not have ‘false consciousness,’ in
which case they might legitimately be ignored, but a contradictory con­
sciousness that contains both old prejudices and intuition about better
futures. The role of the intellectual, Mills argues back in his 1990 essay, is
to build on the workers’ nucleus of good common sense to make it more
unitary and coherent. Note how different this is from the veil of ignorance,
which a philosopher might imagine himself to be performing from
Nowhere Towers, as the means to craft his normative edifice. Instead,
Mills’s critique of the Grenadian party and his account of Gramsci point
toward a very different philosophical practice, in which one learns from
a variety of folks, listens with care rather than arrogance, rejects paternal­
ism and elitism, and works to repair the gap between ‘the mass and the
intellectuals’ (Mills, 2010, p. 138).
Given his analysis of The Lord of the Rings, and the fact that readers are
likely to find Middle Earth more familiar than strange, we might even say that
there is a nascent understanding among whites, some whites, of the racial
rankings of their world, and its fundamental inhumaneness. If this under­
standing has been pushed down, today it is being pulled up, and this may
give us grounds for hope.

CRITICAL REVIEW OF INTERNATIONAL SOCIAL AND POLITICAL PHILOSOPHY
27
So here is the germ of a corrective approach to the epistemology of
ignorance that we can glean from our lost friend and comrade, Charles
Mills, one of the most perceptive human beings and brilliant philosophers
I have ever known. Let us sit with his idea that the distorted lens of race
and class, experienced from variable angles, can yield both insight and
prejudice, rendering us all in one way or another susceptible to illusions
yet also furnishing us with experiences that, if we trust them, yield a better
understanding of our reality. If social practices of ignorance counsel us to
push away the things we know about injustice, and defer to our ostensible
betters, perhaps we need to formulate norms of epistemic practice that
encourage self-trust and the cultivation of a more careful perception. Even
for whites, or lovers of The Lord of the Rings, there is something to work
with here: a base-line knowledge of how crazy it is to want genocide, to
live in the midst of such stark economic injustices, to accept the familiar
everydayness of racism as a background so inevitable it can be ignored. In
other words, if we reconnect with our critical purchase on our surround­
ings, and ourselves, all is not lost.
With that controversial claim, I conclude.
Notes
1. The genealogy I offer here is not meant to support the claim that Mills was the
sole progenitor of this idea. One can precursors in Marx, in Lukacs, and in feminist,
decolonial, and radical Black traditions. In my view, we should relinquish the
quest for individual sources for ideas. What philosophical titans like Mills provide
is an articulation of a sometimes nascent but widespread inkling of an idea, into
a more developed theoretical account than has been given before.
2. The reason it was called the ‘national question’ rather than the ‘race question’
was because racialized groups were understood to constitute nascent national
formations, such as in the Black Belt South and the Southwestern part of the
United States.
3. And I think it also helps to explain his attentiveness to feminist theory. (He lists
his AOC in his CV as ‘feminism’ – such a rarity for male philosophers of any sort)
Recent research by one of Mills’s students, Greg Slack, makes a convincing case
that Marx did recognize the racialization of labor, in his accounts of the Morant
Bay Rebellion in Jamaica, in fact. So I suspect that the articulation of race and
gender as ‘mere’ superstructural phenomena may be a piece of orthodoxy not
in Marx’s writing themselves but in later interpreters.
4. Again, this was never true of all: in some Marxist groups, Amilcar Cabral’s work
was key, as well as R. Palme Dutt, Samir Amin, Mao Tse-Tung, Ho Chi Minh,
Frantz Fanon, Che Guevara, Regis Debray, José Carlos Mariátegui, and others,
and of course there were many from the Black liberation movement in the
U.S. such as Harry Haywood, George Jackson, James Foreman, as well as sources
from other national liberation movements around the world including
Palestine, Iran and elsewhere. Thus, the way forward for an anti-colonial
Marxism has been in discussion for decades.

28
L. M. ALCOFF
Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author(s).
Notes on contributor
Linda Martín Alcoff is Professor of Philosophy at Hunter College and the
Graduate Center, CUNY. Recent books include Rape and Resistance; (Polity
2018); The Future of Whiteness (Polity 2015); Visible Identities: Race, Gender
and the Self (Oxford 2006).
References
Bayruns García, E. (2020). How racial injustice undermines news sources and
news-based inferences. Episteme, 19(3), 1–22. https://doi.org/10.1017/epi.2020.35
Bayruns García, E. (2021). Racial injustice and information flow. Feminist Philosophical
Quarterly, 7(4), 1–18.
Beltrán, C. (2020). Cruelty as citizenship: How migrant suffering sustains white democ­
racy. University of Minnesota Press.
Code, L. (1991). What can she know? Feminist theory and the construction of knowledge.
Cornell University Press.
Harding, S. (1986). The science question in feminism. Cornell University Press.
Lewis, P., Williams, G., & Clegg, P. (Eds.). (2015). Grenada: Revolution and invasion.
University of West Indies Press.
Longino, H. (1990). Science as social knowledge: Values and objectivity in scientific
inquiry. Princeton University Press.
Mills, C. W. (1988). Alternative Epistemologies. Social Theory and Practice, 14(3),
237–263. https://doi.org/10.5840/soctheorpract198814316
Mills, C. W. (2003). From class to race: Essays in white marxism and black radicalism.
Rowman and Littlefield.
Mills, C. W. (2010). Radical Theory/Caribbean reality: Race, class and Social Domination.
University of West Indies Press.
Mills, C. W. (2015). Global White Ignorance. In M. Gross & L. McGoey (Eds.), Routledge
International Handbook of ignorance studies (pp. 217–227). Routledge.
Mills, C. W. (2017). Black Rights/White wrongs: The critique of racial liberalism. Oxford
University Press.
Mills, C. W. (2018, November). Through a glass whitely: Ideal theory as epistemic
injustice. Proceedings & Addresses of the American Philosophical Association, 92,
43–77.
Mills, C. W. (2022, September). The wretched of Middle-Earth: An orkish manifesto. The
Southern Journal of Philosophy, 60(S1), 105–135. https://doi.org/10.1111/sjp.12477
Morgan, H. (2021). The work of whiteness: A psychoanalytic perspective. Routledge.
Nelson, L. H. (1990). Who knows: From Quine to a feminist Empiricism. Temple University
Press.
O’Neill, O. (1987). Abstraction, idealization, and ideology in ethics. In J. D. G. Evans
(Ed.), Moral philosophy and contemporary problems (pp. 55–69). Cambridge
University Press.
Táíwò, O. O. (2022). Reconsidering reparations. Oxford University Press.
